I'm in the National Yiddish Book Center.
The fourth floor annex, as they call it.
It's really an old factory.
There are dozens of groves of hills.
And interestingly enough, the numbers are Arabic, but the designations are Yiddish.
They have a Yiddish...
Linotype machine, probably the only operating one in the United States.
This is a huge hole.
I would say several hundred feet in length.
I might just count the numbers of rows of shelves here.
And there are perhaps half a dozen kids here who are summer interns completing their internships this week.
Neil.
We're talking to Neil Zagorin, Z-A-T-O-R-I-N.
And you are the bibliographer for the... Are you Yiddish?
Yes, I am.
And I've been here four years.
Can you just give me a bit of your background?
Are you a trained bibliographer?
I was an anthropology major when I was in school.
And where was I?
At the University of Massachusetts.
Okay.
Are you from around here?
I grew up in Springfield, just to the south of here.
The 18,000 square feet on this floor hallows approximately half a million Yiddish books.
which have been sorted out and put on the shelves alphabetically by the author's last name.
The book center has collected over a million pieces.
That includes journals, newspapers, magazines, as well as books.
We get books in all kinds of languages because the people who read these Yiddish books were often bi or tri or quadrilingual.
So we have books in Hebrew and English and Russian and Polish and French and German as well.
But what we're trying to do is
collect the books.
You have shelf marks.
You have a computer that tells you where a title is.
Can you put your hands on something if somebody asks you for it?
Yes, we can, because the collection is organized alphabetically according to the author's last name.
We have college students who work here in the summer opening up boxes of books and sorting them out, and they don't know enough theaters to be able to say this is a novel or this is a book of memoirs, so we just do it alphabetically by the author's last name.
We have a computerized database with 7,500 titles in it now.
We guess, when people ask us to guess, that we have somewhere between 15,000 and 20,000 titles.
Out of the total of somewhere approaching 50,000 titles in modern... Which is the figure that Aaron says.
When I first spoke with him, it was 40,000, but now it's... He rises up with the 50,000.
Zachary Baker, the librarian of Evo Ambitu, has no calling in there.
is the one who upped the estimate.
There are any number of libraries which have more extensive collections of Jewish literature than we do, but this is the only place that has, this is the only place that it can supply books in multiple conferences.
But who has a more extensive collection?
Evo, probably Library of Congress, Oxford,
However, Yale will be in the process of building it up.
Jewish Theological Seminary, Columbia University.
That's what you want.
That's the idea.
That is the idea.
That's the goal.
That's the idea.
This is not a collecting competition.
This is not an archive.
We're a clearinghouse.
We'd be happy if we could put ourselves out of business by sending all the books out.
We recognize that that's not going to happen for a very long time.
We sent 10,000 books out of here last year, which is phenomenal, considering that
10, 15 years ago, there was very little interest at all in Yiddish literature.
But we still get $500,000 a week in the mail.
How do you price them?
96, 97, 98% of the books are priced between $8 and $12.
So basically it's a handling fee.
Yeah.
You're covering your costs, in other words.
We're not even covering the cost from the book sales.
If we...
the properties of our book sales bring in about 10 12 percent of the book sales operating budget you can ask aaron for the exact figure the point is you're not selling for intrinsic value per se you know putting 500 on the price of a book we can only one of 10 of such you know or 20 known copies yeah uh you follow what i'm saying yes yes i do most books we sell
what we consider to be a nominal charge, $8, $10, $12.
And I notice the condition is not really relevant.
You're not about to reject the book if it comes in.
No, we save them all.
You never know when it will be the last copy and somebody might want it.
We don't really do any conservation work.
If a book comes in that's mildew, we try to dry it and wrap it in plastic, and that's really what we can do.
You don't throw anything away.
No.
Do you have an attitude of how you treat these things that come in, these books?
Well, I read these books represent a large part of the cultural heritage of the Jew, Ashkenazi Jews in Europe.
So each book that is here is a part of that heritage, regardless of the condition.
Yeah, that's potentially priceless, I mean, in a sense.
So show me around a little bit.
I mean, you can see by looking at the shows that some books we have hundreds of copies of.
What is this book, for instance?
This book is called 1905.
It's from Moshe Alden.
Write it down for me.
You better actually print it, so I like this.
It's a blue octavo, I would say.
The title is 1905.
Is that right?
Mm-hmm.
1905.
It's a royal blue color.
I would estimate 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 is 60.
120, you have several hundred, perhaps 300 copies of this book.
9th and 10th would be the title of the edition.
Y-U-T-S-U-V-U, and what's that last word there?
How do you spell that?
F-I-N-F.
F-I-N-F, okay.
I suppose you could call him the Dean of the Yiddish Communist.
Okay.
He was the editor of the Jewish Communist newspaper, the Freiheit, and he wrote a lot.
And there was a period in the 20s and 30s when a lot of people bought his books.
This was probably... Printed in the USA.
Most of the books that we have here were printed in the United States.
How do you account for so many copies of this?
I'm not sure how many Jews were living in the United States in the 30s and 40s, but there might have been a couple of million of them who were literate in Yiddish and they read.
They read and they bought books to support the authors and they hung on to them.
I mean, this particular title, there seems to be quite a large, maybe it was printed.
He was a personality among a certain Yiddish community, so when he published a book, people would have bought it.
Let's move along a little bit.
Here's the poet Chaim Nachman Bialik.
We also have lots and lots of his books.
Can we get his name here again?
You can write it down.
That's a nice one.
Copyright.
And he starts from the back and goes forward, right?
He was known, yes.
It opens from the right.
He's known mostly for his Hebrew poetry, but he also
wrote a little bit in Yiddish, and quite a bit of his poetry was translated.
This is a lovely condition, this book.
Quite a few of them are.
A lot of them were... It's a book plate.
It is a book plate.
Can you read it?
Book collection of somebody, Elkin.
That's nice.
This book was actually...
It's Mendel Elkin.
It's very interesting that we open this one.
Mendel Elkin was a Yiddish writer.
It says, Mendel Elkin and mit freindschaft, Yudit Schwarz.
To Mendel Elkin with friendship, Yudit Schwarz.
You know what?
This might be an inscribed copy from the author.
Not the author, but from the poet who translated Bialik's poetry from Hebrew to Yiddish.
Okay.
Spelled Bialik's name, B-I-A-L-I-K, right?
Yeah.
And the Library of Congress has an authority.
And this particular copy we picked up is inscribed by the translator to whom?
To...
Mendel Elkin, who was also a Yiddish writer.
It's very interesting that we have to pull us off the shelf.
I'll take this and talk.
I was just going to say that... Put this one aside.
See that?
I'm glad I came.
Yeah.
That's what's known as an association copy.
The jargon is that's an association copy.
Okay.
The jargon of... You read my book, as I hope you will.
You'll learn some of this stuff.
Who's the picture of this gentleman here?
Chaim Zhitlovsky.
He was another illicit intellectual who shifted among various ideological viewpoints over the course of his life, whose thoughts were quite influential at one point.
Dr. Chaim, C-H-A-I-M-Z-H-I-T-L-O-V-S-K-Y.
His years are 1865 to 1940.
The Library of Congress may have a different version of how his name is.
Is this picture here because his books are here?
Are we down on the Yiddish version of the Zs?
Yes.
And are these the letters here?
Mm-hmm.
How can we have duplication of numbers for rows?
You have certainly more than 14 rows of books.
It's numbered by quadrants and then by row numbers in the quadrants.
Okay.
We don't need to use those numbers.
Jeffrey and I, who have worked here for four years, know where things are in the show.
He was Mendel Moiches.
Mendel Moiches.
M-O-I-C-H-E-R-S.
His surname is S-F-O-R-I-M, 1836-1917.
He was...
He's considered to be the first of the great modern English writers.
Why are these pictures here once again?
Oh, we found them in books or something like that, and we put them up.
Just make it interesting for people.
Take your picture.
This picture is actually in the right place.
It would need to be moved.
How about this picture?
Is this in the right place?
No.
That's what I want to get the picture to.
Move a little bit to the left.
Okay.
Any rare books, per se, out here, or have they been removed from the general stacks?
We keep books that we consider to be rare in the office, and what is a rare book by us is not necessarily something that is rare by a book collector.
What we consider to be noteworthy are things which are seldom and of intrinsic... Well, scarcity.
Scarcity and of intrinsic literary value.
Can you show me some of these?
Sure.
Sure can.
Yiddish books that are rare, according to our standards, are not necessarily monetarily valuable.
No, no.
Well, rare is not, and that's why I'm here.
Rarity is scarcity, and then combined with significance.
So that's, you know... And what we do...
We put catalogs out three or four times a year of titles which have newly been added to our database.
And the catalogs are sent to a range of major libraries and research institutions that do Judaic studies or specifically Yiddish, and they get first picked.
So what we're trying to do is ensure that anything which is very significant or unusual is going to end up in the public domain that way.
Do you think this is 300 feet long?
A football field?
It could be a football field, you know?
I think it's reasonably close.
Yeah, give or take.
You could figure it out by measuring the space between the stanchions and this number of the stanchions.
But I'd say it's close.
It's close.
It's a heck of a lot more than 100, that's for sure.
which is the frontage of my house.
Okay, I don't mean to rush.
Just tell me, give me a fast run by the Glinotype machine.
Well, several years ago, the Jewish Daily Forward in New York.
The Jewish Daily?
Jewish Daily Forward.
Forward, F-O-R-W-A-R-D.
Which at one time had a circulation of a quarter of a million, making it the largest non-English newspaper ever published in the United States.
So the Forward...
at the end of 1989, finally phased out its hot-length printing operation.
They replaced the last nine Yiddish line-of-type machines with one PC.
And the Workman Circle on the forward were kind enough to arrange to take one of the machines as well.
Do you have a copy of that newspaper line?
Of this article?
You, we have caught, there are a number of articles about this, and you should probably... I got one, they gave me one from the Wall Street Journal, but I'd love to get a copy of this.
You should probably ask Aaron, because he's, Aaron would be... The Union News is, where is that published in New York?
Oh, I could get that, then.
I could call that.
Maybe the Wall Street Journal won a spike down, right?
Mm-hmm.
Okay.
Go ahead.
It was quite interesting, if you get this article, you can read all about it.
It was a white project.
to bring it up here three trips to the truck to bring the parts up and then it took this expert mechanic half a week to put it back together and then it took us months to learn how to make it run but it does run now most of the time occasionally it gets jammed but we have we're very fortunate in that the small number of printers who use this technology are very much a
a clan, and they love it that somebody has a Yiddish archetype.
So we have any number of people who... You have to get the hot lead and heat up and melt these ingots.
I wrote in a newspaper for 20 years, and before they went over, it's a cold type.
It's that little well where the stuff is... The pot.
The pot is what we call it.
It works.
That's wonderful.
We had to learn how to do it ourselves.
It was quite expensive to salvage this.
And this was a project which came up very suddenly.
So we had the idea that we would send a letter around to a core group of the book center's most avid supporters and ask people for donations.
And with the stipulation, anybody who donated $50 or more would get their name set in a line of time.
So we figured we'd get 50 or 100 people to donate money, and that would help subsidize a lot of the cost of bringing this back, and we had about 1,200.
Isn't that wonderful?
Well, it was wonderful in one sense, and on the other hand, it was terrible because we had to figure out how to print out 1,200 names.
But you did.
It took months, and we had to learn how to do it.
They were patient, right?
Yeah, they were patient.
I don't think they did it from the line of type.
No, they didn't.
We had to learn how to do it ourselves through results.
Chris Mourney, a printer in the area who has a small hot light operation of his own, came in quite often.
Spent a couple of hours with us showing us how to use it.
He eventually taught us.
If people want to donate money to the book center, we'll put their name on it.
Among Jewish people, it's a custom to celebrate
a happy occasion by making a donation to a worthwhile college.
This is how we recognize that.
Nice.
Okay.
You're going to show me some rarities.
And within the context that you've explained.
Okay.
Understanding the context that you've explained.
Good.
This facility, I gather, opened year-round.
Yes, it is.
But you're blessed by the presence of the
of interns during the summer.
During the summer.
Among the many other things, among some of the many surprises that come away have been two collections of vintage music, which turned out to be publishers' remainders.
Really?
I can see they're in excellent condition.
Well, these were published from the turn of the century to shortly after World War I by the Hebrew Publishing Company, which is a family-owned business, and they stopped
They got out of the sheet music business shortly after World War I, and hung on to the rest of this music.
And the family, the business moved from place to place, and they dragged the music around with them for years.
And about 10 years ago, it was sold to somebody outside the family who finally decided to get rid of the music and be doing any of this first last year.
So actually, interns from last summer and this summer
spent time organizing the collection alphabetically and two of the interns that you met here today have written a computerized database have written a program for a computerized database and they've begun to catalog it okay so we're actually cornering the market on antique theater sheet music because over here we have a collection of sheet music which we acquired several years previously which is
And this one, this one, this collection of sheet music has already been catalogued, so there's a copy.
I can handle that, right?
Yes, you can't copy the catalog.
A man named Sidney Rimmer, who lives in Brooklyn, found all this music in a warehouse in Manhattan.
Just left there and he thought it would be a shame to see it disappear, so he brought it home to Borough Park and moved his car out of the garage and moved the music in and put it in an air conditioner and hung onto it for over a decade, not knowing what would happen.
I believe he lives in Borough Park in Brooklyn.
Can you spell that?
B-O-R?
B-O-R.
B-O-R-U-G-H.
You can look it up in a map.
I'm not sure.
It's a neighborhood in Brooklyn.
He hung on to it.
What was his name?
Sidney Rimmer.
I believe R-I-M-M-E-R.
He hung on to it for over a decade, thinking it would be a shame to see it lost.
When he heard about the book's energy, he donated us the music and
David and Lucille Guild and two generous Book Center supporters donated the money to catalog it.
Great.
Okay.
We'll write along, as we say.
This is our office.
This is where we do all our book processing.
That is, accessioning the books into our computerized database and also packing and sending out book orders.
which we send all over the world.
I mean, we have sent books to Guam and Thailand and places that you would not expect Yiddish books to go to.
This is also where we keep the books which we would consider to be rare or unusual.
So an example, well, some examples of that would be books autographed by the authors, such as the one we just found on the shelf several minutes ago.
So this is basically, I'm going to take a picture of this.
We would
books in here.
What other kinds of things would we consider unusual?
Books published for unit language children's schools, which tended to have been heavily used and would fall apart.
They were often, you know, these little, little, teeny tiny paperbacks.
like this.
We consider those to be unusual.
We have those in the office.
There are quite a number of Yiddish books about the Holocaust.
Perhaps as much as 10% of our book collection are books that are about the Holocaust in one way or another.
And some of those books are actually
A lot of the books are memoirs, but some of the books are very unusual.
There is a genre called , memorial books, which are like compilations about people who would come from these small towns in Europe, which were wiped off the map, of what life was like in those towns.
What they remember about people who lived in those towns, what happened to the town during
the war and so on and the books were published by subscription usually because the only people who were interested in the 50s and 60s were the people who had come from the times themselves they're very very rare and they have been 400 or 500 titles published and this is what we have this is what we have right here we've also found a very small number of books that were published in the displaced persons camps in europe in the late 1920s those are very very
Very, very unusual.
That's beautiful.
Look at that.
Unversht in our voice.
This was a magazine published.
You can leave it in the class.
I just want to see what was published.
Where did you learn Yiddish here?
A little bit at home.
My father and my grandparents are all immigrants.
From where?
Jewish Lithuania.
Lithuanian, right?
Russia.
In the British zone of occupation, there was a displaced persons camp at Bergen-Balsen, which had previously been a transportation camp.
And that's when this was published?
Yes.
Wow.
What's the title of this?
Unzerstimme, which means our voice.
Some of the earlier... How would you spell Unzerstimme?
U-N-D-Z-E-R, second word, S-H-T-I-M-E.
And what is, describes that photograph there.
Well, our work on the cover shows pictures of concentration camp inmates.
in the barracks, in their uniforms.
Somebody's reading a book by candlelight.
What was the title?
The year on this?
This is 1946.
October 2nd, 1946.
It's pretty important diving.
Yes, it is.
It was the 14th issue.
Some of the earlier issues were published before they had access to Hebrew type, and they were done with them.
I don't know if we have any copies of them.
Yeah, it was an early...
This is number four published in October 1945.
They didn't have typed yet, so it was handwritten.
This is two months after the conclusion of the war, two or three months.
Well, it was probably about half a year after
It may have been half a year or so after liberation of the camp.
I'm not quite sure of the day.
Which camp was this in Bergen-Belsen?
Which was in West Germany somewhere.
And this was published there?
Yes.
There were a lot of Jews.
Look, there's an illustration of a swastika.
Let me just go slowly and describe that a little bit.
A broken sword and a broken rifle.
And a torn sword.
Can you just read from one of these for me, or just a fragment?
How about reading just a fragment of one of these little things for me?
If I were that broken, something was particularly moving.
Are there many copies of this known, by the way?
Very, very few.
These are very rare.
Do you call them magazines, or what would you call them?
They were journals.
bi-weekly journal.
The six-year horrible path of suffering and superhuman terror or superhuman suffering
Wow.
That's remarkable.
Inscription at the beginning of the journal.
That's fine.
That's what I would... And these were given to you by somebody who was... I believe a good bunch of these were given to us by a man, a concentration camp inmate who survived the war who lived in Montreal.
But others have come in over the years from various... But for him to part with these is quite a gesture, isn't it?
A great gesture.
And I'm sure to him it's quite meaningful.
There's a page... Let me just do U-N-Z-E-R.
This is Romanized as it would be in Polish.
Okay.
S-C-T-Y-M-E.
Romanized as it would be in Polish, which translates Our Voice.
Publish of a Central Jewish Committee in Bergen-Belsen-Belsen.
Okay.
Very good.
Okay, let's...
That makes the trip.
I think Yiddish was actually supported to a certain extent in the Soviet Union in the years following the revolution up until the time that the Stalinist purges really began to take hold.
And in the 20s and early 30s, there were actually these very wonderful Yiddish scholarly academies in a couple cities in Kiev.
and Kharkov in Ukraine, in Minsk, in White Russia, where there was a lot of really fine scholarship on Jewish ethnography, Yiddish linguistics, and so on.
A lot of that was carried out.
They published scholarly journals, which we find very, very rarely.
Those books were very significant.
There was Yiddish publishing in the Soviet Union, which is very rare.
It's very rare that we find those, but we do find them occasionally.
You've been here for four years.
You're 26 or 27 years old, is my guess.
33.
Good.
And is this a future for you, or is this... Tell me about your plan.
What does it do for you, necessarily professionally, with a statement?
Well, it's tremendously... I guess it's the most meaningful job I've ever had.
It's also the most enjoyable job I've ever had.
I mean, I'm the bibliographer, but I do a wide variety.
I have a wide variety of things that I do here besides cataloging books.
I'm the person who drives through the trucks in New York to pick books up from people's houses and occasionally to Montreal, and that's a wonderful thing to do.
There's a certain amount of physical labor that goes on in maintaining this warehouse, but Jeffrey and I do, and I mean, to me, that's something which is enjoyable as an occasion.
It's handling.
I mean, it's being physical.
It's very tactile.
It's being in touch.
Now, you go out and you rescue the book, so to speak.
Do you have any interesting anecdotes about meeting with people and the ceremonial... Ten years ago, we used to get the books quite often directly from the owners.
And you really don't see that that much anymore in the four years or so that I've been going on these book pickup trips.
We tend to get books from the children or the grandchildren.
The owners themselves have either moved from their houses to an apartment or a senior citizen home or they died.
We're getting the books from the descendants who may or who usually don't have any use from them.
So we don't have these dramatic... Sometimes they're quite dramatic because we'll go to... There have been times when we've gone to a house and the person has just died and the child will meet us there.
What is this cut, by the way?
This was the actual pushcart.
I don't think it's... Oh, it says Town Peddler License, BDLR 32406.
I don't know what it was used.
Probably a News Wagon or something.
I doubt it.
No, actually, this is... A dramatic story?
Yeah.
Two or three years ago, we got a call that Shia Tenenbaum, a Yiddish writer who lived in Queens, had died.
So we went to his house.
This was a very educated man, a lawyer who lived in Poland and Bulgaria and Paris and a few other places.
He loved to write.
He usually published his own books.
How do you spell his name?
S-H-E-A Tenenbaum, T-E-N-E-N-B-A-U-L.
He published his own books and he followed the time-honored tradition among Yiddish writers of sometimes
inscribing a book to somebody, sending it to him, and asking for a contribution.
That was something that was done.
But he published his own books, and they were beautifully published books.
I can show them to you on the show.
When we went to his apartment, we found that he had boxes, I can show you the pile downstairs, hundreds of boxes of his books, of maybe a dozen or so different titles, which he had.
In his two-room apartment in Queens, there was a bedroom, and then there was a living room, and his bedroom was entirely taken up with the books.
And he, for the last part of his life when he was ailing, he had lived in the bedroom along with a 24-hour live-in attendant.
So he had passed away recently, and the attendant was going through his belongings and sorting them out.
And it had been arranged that when the time came, we would be called to the hall to come and get the books.
So we went to this wonderful old apartment house in Queens and moved the books out.
It was a neighborhood which at one time had been heavily Jewish, but it's now mostly Korean, I believe.
That was a pretty dramatic thing.
That's nice.
How long ago was this?
Three years, maybe?
Okay.
Listen, I've got to run.